" The first art-film ? . this is possibly the most beautiful of the early Lumiere shorts . A boat rows from the front of the screen away from the audience to the back , while to the right , women wait on the port . The camera , as usual , does not move , but the play of sunlight on the waves are gorgeous , and the rippling movement is so vibrant , especially within such a static frame , that it looks like one is watching an actual scene behind glass . As with ` Demolition d'un mur ' , the real frisson of the film comes from the unexpected . The scene proceeds as expected , the boat moving steadily along . But , just as it turns , a stronger wave lunges , and almost capsizes the boat . Before we discover what will happen , the reel , and the film , ends . These early films made no precautions for the necessity of extra reels . But the effect is quite shocking . The unexpected violence is unsettling enough , but with the film over , and loose ends nowhere near being tied up - indeed , just initiated a narrative , in the dying seconds - the audience is left agonising in the dark . What happened next ? Inadvertently , the audience is required to imagine for itself , imagine what 's not capable of being represented by the cinema , something the Hollywood generic system to come will stamp out . With its daring use of ellipsis , is this the first art-film , the first ` Cat People ' ? " ,10
" collision between the tradition of family values , the modernity of the new medium , and the inscrutability of nature . . Two loving parents feed their happy baby on the perch of their country home . It is often said that these early Lumiere shorts are primitive because they have not yet mastered basic film grammar , such as camera movement , editing or the close-up , films like these being a simple , static set-u ; , the camera pointing at the scene from a middle distance . But as filmmakers like Godard , Ozu and Kitano , for instance , realized , that very grammar can be a violation of the integrity of the image , forcing us to concentrate of the structure in which the image is only a unit , rather than the image itself . There is nothing primitive or simple about this particular image ; as critics have noted , this film offers two levels of movement , one human , recognisable , communal -LRB- the family -RRB- ; the other -LRB- the trees blowing -RRB- part of a different order altogether , of nature , cycles , immemoriality . So while the family represents a similar idea of continuity as the trees , of the species being reproduced , it sis also offered in stark contraast to them , as each member of the trio will eventually die , for all the nourishment and fertility , while nature lives on , indifferent . This frisson of mortality undercuts the film 's essential conservatism , and differentiates it from the sinister surveillance of the earlier ` Sortie d'Usine ' . This recognition that the powers of the camera-wielding Lumieres are in fact limited , that they are not as omniscient as they once thought they were , is perhaps dramatised in the figure of the father , one of the brothers , one of the first great director-stars , paving the way for Chaplin , Keaton and Welles . His crossing the line from director to star , from passive to active , from subject to object , represents a breach between the observer and observed , a breaking of that invisible line , a destruction of that contract Hollywood will try so desperately to enforce , between reality and fiction . The watcher is now the watched , distinctions and hierarchies have been abolished . Ironically , immortality has been conversely guarenteed - while the man behind the camera is lost , fading into a mere eye , a role taken over by every viewer , the actor brother is trapped forever in this rigid , simple domestic scenario , feeding the ever-hungry , unthinking baby , a harbinger of the medium he invented . " ,10
" An everyday occurrence for posterity . Louis Lumiere 's brother , Auguste , and his wife sit at a table , in their garden , feeding their child - who sits between them . Shrubbery in the background rustles indicating a slight breeze . Perhaps the public , in 1896 , would see this and wish they could preserve family scenes such as this for their posterity . Now , 107 years later , we can - on film or video . We have come a long way , baby ! " ,4
" The first family film ? . Monsieur Lumi re not only wants us to know that he 's one of the most talented filmmakers out there . He 's also a sublime daddy to his little baby-boy . Father , mother and son sit at the table and P re Lumi re keeps spoon-feeding the little one . His wife occasionally distracts the baby from his daddy and it 's a constant battle for the little one 's attention . I bet he must have loved it . Unfortunately , the quality of the film is rather low . Even for 1895 , there have been more watchable films made before . But still you can see it has lots of heart , two parents every child wishes for and that is why I think it 's worth a watch , not only for film enthusiasts . " ,4
" Ouch ! That 's Got ta Hurt ! -LRB- SPOILERS -RRB- . SPOILERS Well , I am back to commenting on silent films . After the atrocity known as the Old Maid Having Her Picture Taken I am happily treated to an experimental English film . After I saw this I imagined how the audience back in 1900 were like after they saw this . They must have been freaking out . Then the Great Train Robbery traumatized the audience more . Okay , back to the film . I guess you could call this suspense of 1900 , as a stage coach hits the camera . This was a great silent film , and different . Here is the `` plot '' of How It Feels Like To Be Run Over . This is not really how it feels like to be run over , but still . A stage coach slowly appears on screen . It then is very clear on screen . Then it leaves as quickly as it came . Then another stage coach appears on screen . It becomes clear , but then it changes directions and goes towards the camera . The people in it flail their arms wildly , but it is too late . The stage coach hits the camera . The camera goes blank . Then unreadable words appear on screen quickly . Overall , this is an interesting little silent experimental short . It may be a bit disturbing for audiences back in 1900 , but this is not 1900 any more . This also created the infamous thing-hits-camera-and-camera-goes-blank . Well , not really , but this is the first movie ever to do that . The acting was good . You may not be able to see that , but it takes talent to wave your arms . Anyway , this is a surreal silent film that does not really teach you how it is like to get run over . 8\/10 Recommended Films : Roundhay Garden Scene , Traffic Crossing Leeds Bridge , and the Great Train Robbery . " ,8
" Marvelous ! . In less than 5 years , the cinema had made a gigantic jump from the short `` documentaries '' of the early pioneers -LRB- Le Prince , Dickson and the Lumi re brothers -RRB- to the amazing Cinemagic of french director Georges M li s , who became one of the first filmmakers to focus entirely in making fiction movies . Ever since he watched a movie for the first time -LRB- as a member of the Lumi res ' first audience -RRB- , M li s was convinced of the enormous potential of the new invention as a form of entertainment , as as soon as he could he started to make his own films . By 1901 , stage magician Georges M li s had already 5 years of making films and experimenting with special effects , and his movies were well-known around the world as the finest films of his time . With his many discoveries in the field of special effects , M li s was able of making films that looked like real magic , and his movies became more complex with time , and even more fascinating . `` L' Homme la T te en Caoutchouc '' -LRB- literally , `` The Man with the Rubber Head '' -RRB- is another one of M li s ' many `` trick films '' , which were short movies that showed him making an impossible magical trick . In this movie , an alchemist -LRB- as usual , M li s himself -RRB- is preparing a strange experiment in his laboratory . The alchemist puts an odd devise on a table , and connects it to his bizarre creation : a living copy of his own head -LRB- M li s again -RRB- that stands over the table without a clue about what will happen to it . Using an air pump he connected to the head , the alchemist begins to blow , and the living head begins to increase its size as if it was a balloon made of rubber . The head reaches a gigantic size , but the alchemist decides to release the air from it as he fears the head may explode . Proud of his invention , the alchemist decides to show it to his assistant -LRB- quite probably played by his wife Jeanne d'Alcy , but this is not confirmed -RRB- , but the assistant may not be as careful as he was . As in many of his early shorts , this movie is a `` gimmick film '' , in other words , a movie devised around a special effect in order to show it like a magician would make a trick . In this case , the movie combines an excellent use of multiple exposures and editing to create the two heads , and a remarkably creative use of zoom to create the illusion of a head increasing its size . While a quite simple trick to our modern standards , the effect achieved is one of M li s ' most amazing and better done special effects , making `` The Man with the Rubber Head '' one of the best `` gimmick films '' in the Cinemagician 's career . However , this short is more than an excellent gimmick , as what makes `` The Man with the Rubber Head '' different from his earlier films -LRB- and the similar movies of his competitors -RRB- is the care M li s put to create a `` story '' to his trick . While in his first films he simply appeared as a magician doing his show , in this movie there is a set build for the scene -LRB- instead of a simple circus stage -RRB- , and while simple , the movie is clearly set in the middle ages . This gives the movie a distinct atmosphere , and already shows the path that M li s was taking at that stage in his career , as that very same year he would start making his now famous series of fantasy films , which would be far more complex than his `` gimmick films '' . One can say that it was with in those movies where M li s tested his craft before making his masterpieces like `` Le Voyage Dans la lune '' the following years . 8\/10 " ,8
" One of many weird `` head '' movies from M li s . The very early French film director M li s was super-famous for his trick cinematography . He deserved this fame for such standout films as Le Voyage Dans le Lune and I personally think he was the greatest movie maker of his age . Compared to Edison and Lumiere 's films , his movies were always superior -- featuring great sets , stories and camera-work . And , compared to later luminaries such as D. W. Griffith , I think M li s ' films are much more watchable today . This film features the director 's disembodied head as the star . Believe it or not , this was not very unusual for M li s , as I have seen several films where his disembodied head performs ! This is very clever and funny and it differs in this case because the head it enlarged again and again using a pump until it ultimately explodes ! And , for the year it was made , it looked amazingly real ! Funny stuff indeed . If you want to see this film online , go to Google and type in `` M li s '' and then click the video button for a long list of his films that are viewable without special software . " ,9
" ka-boom ! . Melies had a sense of playfulness about his films , and this is one of the more amusing ones : Melies takes a head -- which is Melies ' head -- attaches it to some bellows , and blows it up like a balloon . True , there 's no deep thought involved , but there need n't be . It 's less than a minute and easily sustains the one joke . Melies was inventing techniques as he went along , borrowing from other media , just as D.W. Griffith shortly would . There is an exuberance in seeing something done for the first time that is sorely lacking in later uses of the same editing effect . I suppose it 's because Melies was having fun himself . " ,9
" Pretty entertaining for 1903 . This film is cute and watchable even today -- and that 's something you CA N'T say about many of the very early movies -- particularly those of George Albert Smith . Most films of the day are of pretty mundane topics or are only about one or two minutes long . This film , in contrast , is longer and actually tries to have Mary Jane try to be a slapstick comedienne . She is a cook and does n't seem to do anything right . While not great or amazing like the contemporary films of Georges M li s , this is still pretty good and watchable -- particularly the slapstick ending ! Plus , films like this eventually led to films like those of the later and much more famous slapstick comedians , so historically it 's pretty important . " ,7
" A masterpiece of political comedy . -LRB- spoiler in last paragraph -RRB- . This famous black comedy was , sadly , the last film by early cinema pioneer , G.A. Smith . Like Dreyer , Bergman and Lang after him , he takes essentially theatrical material to create pure cinema . The setting seems stock Victoriana , as an inept scullery maid blows herself to smithereens -LRB- no pun intended ! -RRB- with paraffin oil - the forbiddingly bare kitchen ; the wink-to-the-audience broadness of the acting , from Smith 's wife , star of so many of his films . But it does what theater could never hope to do - it shatters the restricted theatrical space as Mary Jane flies through the chimney ; and it brings the dead back to life , just as cinema preserves and makes immemorial the transient . The film is also considered important as one of the first to use a vertical wipe , in this case creating a cartoon-like effect , as Mary Jane nudges the audience as she holds a can with ` PARAFFIN ' written in huge letters -LRB- a joke borrowed by Beckett over fifty years later in his ` Act Without Words ' -RRB- . Perhaps even more intriguing than the film 's formal originality is the ambiguity of the content . It seems to be a demonisation of women , of the new Woman or Suffragette , who was demanding the vote at this time in Britain , and victim of all kinds of establishment hatred and ridicule . This film seems to conflate two very real fears of the establishment - women and the working class - who , enfranchised , could have caused great damage to the status quo . Before her accident , Mary Jane is messing around the kitchen , and gets some soot above her lip , creating a moustache , to her delight , as she looks in a very Lacanian mirror . The message is clear - women just want to be men , and steal their power : the result is the destruction of the home , either deliberately or through non-masculine incompetence . Against a gorgeous , ` Caligari ' - bleached backdrop , Mary Jane is buried , ` rest in pieces ' , her class and gender roles shattered , as conservatives wag their fingers at her grave , warning of the dangers of giving women any kind of responsibility . But Mary Jane has the last laugh , and rises from the dead to cause further havoc - Smith taking Freud 's ideas about repression and applying them to the social context - the more you try to keep people down , the more they 'll come back at you . The fact that the ` patriarchal ' figure of the director uses his wife to tell this story is all the more remarkable . " ,9
" Magical . One of Melies ' elaborate story productions , ranking with VOYAGE TO THE MOON , using camera tricks , sleight of hand , elaborate costumes and interesting model work . Technically it will look primitive to the modern eye -- the sets are clearly sets , the models clearly models -- but it is all done with Melies ' verve and dedication . Certainly , the grotto and underwater sets are beautiful ; he knew how to draw stonework . Melies , I feel , remains the most accessible of the oldest directors , in large part because of the sheer sense of showmanship and joy that is evident in these works . His scenes , when they are not sleight-of-hand magic , are essentially tableaux , punctuated by acrobats . His tableaux are much more elaborate than other directors who use the form , providing a feast for the eye . Working , as he does in this movie , with familiar images , he elaborates them , whereas in VOYAGE TO THE MOON , he invents them and suggest them . The effect is -- there is no other word for it -- magical . " ,10
" First there was Melies . . There 's a lot of Gilliam and Kubrick to be found in Georges Melies fifteen minute phantasmagoria epic A Kingdom of the Faires made 30 an 40 years before they were born . Melies pulls out all the stops with this wildly color tinted happily ever after nightmare featuring hallucinogenic compositions and early experimentation with miniatures and fish tanks between camera and set . A King insults a witch who exacts revenge by abducting the princess to a far off lair . The Prince pursues , has to undergo a series of challenges including a stop in Atlantis but ultimately vanquishes the witch with enormous assistance from the good fairy Aurora by drowning her . Melies moves everything but the camera in this multi set-up -LRB- backdrop -RRB- picaresque struggle between good and evil lush in opulent design and color ; epitomized in the stunning turn of the century pop-out book finale . Despite its creaky look Kingdom is filled with wildly etched compositions of audacity and comedy all from the mind and eye of the neglected pioneer Melies . " ,9
" Extraordinary Narrative For Its Time . Georges Melies puts together an amazing -LRB- for its time -RRB- narrative about a prince and princess kept apart by a scheming witch , and the prince is thrust into a journey to rescue the princess by traveling through and receiving assistance from Neptune , the god of the sea , and his cohorts . The entire film , at least the print I saw , is hand-painted , color-tinted , and it 's simply amazing . The costumes , sets , backdrops , props , model work , and special effects are all superb not only for its time but for the entire silent era . The framing and composition of scenes is superior and the acting is more than acceptable , considering the exaggerated mannerisms which were already creeping into films at the time followed by more of an on-rush of them in the two decades to come . The color is reminiscent of illustrations in books , which appeared in the early decades of the twentieth century , and it adds greatly to the fantasy\/mythological elements portrayed in the film . Melies expertly weaves his narrative utilizing all of the aforementioned elements in expert fashion . \*\*\* of 4 stars . " ,8
" I 'd like to be , under the sea ... . Following on the heels of his hugely important A Trip to the Moon , Georges M li s directed this feature . Like its predecessor it was another narrative film . It was one of several that the director made that fell into the fairy tale category . A princess is abducted by a witch and a gallant prince embarks on quest to save her . His adventure takes him to the ocean floor where he encounters fairies from the court of Neptune and is subsequently taken on a journey inside a giant whale . He then battles the witch and her minions in the final conflict . There is a lot of great imagery here and it exists in a great color tinted print . The fantastical underwater world is particularly nice . There are a lot of different sets for a film of this age . Many of them are quite elaborate and detailed . Like other films of the time it has no inter-titles , so it would n't be very easy knowing exactly what is going on without a narrator . Fortunately there are versions of this with a voice-over , which was how the feature was meant to be presented in any case . But even without this it is consistently very interesting visually and is a great little fantasy adventure . M li s was easily the most important director of the earliest years of cinema and this feature quite clearly indicates why . " ,8
" A Ten for its Time , and Still Charms . You can not rate this by comparing it to a modern movie . That would be like denigrating the intelligence of a dolphin because it does n't think with a human brain . Given the date of release -LRB- 1903 : that is OH THUREE !!! -RRB- it is a wonder that this movie even exists . That is it is available in what appears to be a well-preserved first or second-generation print , almost scratch-free and in dazzling color , is practically miraculous enough to have made Darwin a believer . The best version of this film that I know of is in the Flicker Alley 5-dvd set , enhanced by Eric Beheim 's synthesized but nonetheless completely fitting and well-synchronized musical soundtrack . There is still much that could be done to clean up this print : it is possible to matte over much of the sparkling on the left side of the frame , and blot out almost all of the blobs of crud and scrapes that come and go , eliminate a few flash frames , and of course hide all the splices . There is still a little annoying jitter in the underwater scene , but it 's not too bad -LRB- and after all it IS underwater -RRB- . If these things are corrected , or if you just use a little imagination to overlook the blemishes , the quality of this film is really staggering -LRB- 1903 !! -RRB- . It is probably the most beautiful of all the existing M li s films -LRB- maybe right beside Inventor Crazybrains and his Wonderful Airship , also in color -RRB- . Of course M li s uses a number of antiquated stage conventions , such as trap doors and wobbly sliding flats ; and for some reason he hired an oddly stolid and frumpy fairy grand-godmother to introduce the apotheosis -LRB- itself a creaking stage convention -RRB- , but this all adds to the fun . -LRB- Remember , it is NINETEEN OH THREE ! -RRB- The story itself is secondary , and it has no particular depth , but it is extremely well put together . And besides , unless we 're talking classic literature , story should really be secondary anyway : it 's what you DO with the story that matters , and here M li s really pulls out the stops with fabulous pantomime , running and leaping -LRB- most notably from M li s himself -RRB- , exotic costumes , amazing fantastic backdrops and characters -LRB- and animals ! -RRB- , cumulative drama with a fantastic climactic fire scene , a well-constructed and engaging narration , and in the case of the Flicker Alley release , a speaker who really charms and amuses with some highly mangled -LRB- but still understandable -RRB- English , like a dear old granduncle from The Old Country spinning a story for the kids . So far this is the only movie I 've ever rated a 10 . I wish I could rate the restoration a 10 , but 9.5 is pretty good . " ,10
" The World 's first feature film ! . THE STORY OF THE KELLY GANG is believed to be the world 's first feature length film . Running at between 65 and 70 minutes , it was billed at the time as the longest film ever made . It toured Australia for nine years and was an enormous success . Today only fragments survive , and it is hard to judge the film 's artistic merits . About nine minutes of footage exists - some found on a garbage dump in Melbourne . Some of this footage may be out-takes . The footage is held by ScreenSound Australia , the National Screen and Sound Archive , in Canberra . The sequences show some enthusiastic acting , although the camera-work is static -LRB- like most films of the period -RRB- . The most remarkable shot is probably when a priest , carrying a wounded man over his shoulder , walks toward and just past the camera , creating a strong sense of drama and movement . The final shoot-out scene is also well filmed - with Ned Kelly moving , and shooting , toward the camera , as troopers flee to the sides . A remarkable film , of great historical importance , that all film students should see . Up until World War 1 , when initially neutral America began to dominate the world of film distribution , Australia had one of the most thriving and innovative film industries in the world . " ,10
